# Language Purpose/Genesis

## Swift

Swift was first introduced in 2014 at Apple's Worldwide Developer Conference. Developed by Apple, it was intended to serve as the go-to language to develop native applications on all of Apple's platforms: iOS, macOS, tvOS, and watchOS. Apple wanted to provide a uniform platform across all of their platforms that would allow developers to easily transition from one to another. Since being rolled out, Swift has seen 4 major versions that have brought with them many changes in reaction to developers' critiques. As a result, Swift has remained near the top of "Most Loved Programming Language" surveys, including a 1st place finish in 2015 and a 2nd place finish in 2016 in StackOverflow's annual developer poll.

Swift was introduced as a replacement for Objective-C, which had been the native language for iOS development since the release of the iPhone in 2008. In contrast to Objective-C, Swift syntax is simple and safe, as well as much more readable. When Swift was introduced, the phrase, "Objective-C minus the C," became popularized because of Swift's ability to hide pointers and other unsafe accessors from the developer. Swift was also developed to feel familiar to other popular Object Oriented (OO) programming languages such as Java and C#; Swift uses familiar syntax such as "dot notation" to make method calls and has access modifiers including `public` and `private`.

While similar to other OO languages, Swift includes features that helps address some major problems that typical OO languages and OO development bring along with them. Perhaps the biggest breakthrough solution that Swift provided were optionals. An optional value may or may not be null, and as a result, must be checked for null before it is used. This construct solves the age-old problem in languages like Java where developers often attempt to access properties or methods on a null reference, ending up in a `NullPointerException`. By default in Swift, there should never be an attempt to access a member on a null reference, because an optional variable must be unwrapped (i.e. checked to see if it is null) before any operations can be performed with it. Swift is also a "protocol-oriented" language, meaning that classes should gain functionality by following or implementing a protocol instead of inheriting from a parent class. This solves a common problem in Java, where every time functionality needs to be added, classes are extended, causing unnecessary complexity to be added to the codebase.

---

## Kotlin

Kotlin was unveiled in July 2011. Created by JetBrains, a team of developers from Saint Petersburg, Russia, Kotlin was designed as a new language for the Java Virtual Machine. JetBrains started development on Kotlin in an effort to create a language that not only included all the features the team was looking for, but also compiled quickly. Version 1.0 of Kotlin released on February 15, 2016. At Google I/O 2017, Google officially announced that it would provide first-class support for Kotlin on the Android platform. Since then, Kotlin has become a popular language for Andoid development. Kotlin is an open source language.

Kotlin was designed as an almost direct replacement for Java. However, due to the large amount of Java code currently in use in production platforms, JetBrains realized that it would be difficult to create a brand-new language that could be widely adopted. Also, it was important that Kotlin be able to utilize the large number of existing Java libraries. Therefore, Kotlin was designed to run on the existing JVM and include interoperability with Java. Existing Java code can be called from Kotlin, and Kotlin code can also be called from Java. This creates an interesting symbiotic relationship between the two languages, and also eases the migration of platforms from Java to Kotlin. Kotlin also includes the ability to be transpiled to JavaScript, which allows Kotlin code to be used for both client and server-side web development. Kotlin transpiled to JavaScript has the ability to use existing JavaScript libraries.

Kotlin addresses several problems introduced by Java. One major problem in Java is the risk of null references - the so-called 'Billion Dollar Mistake'. Kotlin combats this problem by introducing _nullable_ types. Variables that are not explicitly defined as nullable are never allowed to be assigned to a null value. This allows the platform to gaurantee null safety in accessing variables. Another problem in Java is the lack of first-class functions. In java, functions must be part of a class, and cannot be directly passed as arguments. Kotlin solves this problem by creating function types. This allows functions to be passed between other functions and defined inline. Kotlin's function abilities also include lambda expressions, anonymous functions, and extension functions. A final improvement introduced in Kotlin is the aggressive type inference of values and expressions. This change greatly reduces the language's complexity and verbosity.

[Back to Home](../README.md)
